we wouldn't be arguing about whether
there were women and men if things
didn't need to be retooled from the very
bottom that's my sense of the situation
now that is a critical conversation
whether the god-shaped hole gets filled
by God exactly is something maybe for us
to discuss on the shows you're going to
be joining me for the next nine evenings
on my we who wrestle with God Tour and I
would like you to come armed with your
sharpest sword and hold nothing back
you've asked me to do something
generally speaking I'm pretty good at
which is to be disagreeable and tried to
find holes and things I'm going to be
coming at it from a kind of first
principles uneducated but I hope
sufficiently intelligent perspective and
I think you could offer to the audience
a really critical response that's
thoughtful so that I can see if there's
still holes in what I've laid out
because I can't find any that's what
we're going to explore I can't
wait the difference between the
temperature 200 years ago and the
temperature now and you're going to this
1.5 degrees and the Earth is going to
burn up or whatever that's less than
between breakfast and lunch it it is so
stupidly ridiculous to say that a 1.5
degree celsius increase in global
atmospheric temperature is going to be a
disaster as a matter of fact it will
open up vast areas of Farmland that were
too cold
before
[Music]
hello
everyone I have the opportunity today to
talk to Dr Patrick Moore I've been
following Dr Moore for quite a long time
and I had the privilege of hearing him
live in uh in a little meeting in on
Vancouver Island here recently and we
decided to do a podcast together Dr
Moore is in the interesting position
of being skeptical to say the least and
unconvinced of the doomsaying
prognostications of the climate
apocalypse mongers but also have been
been active in the environmentalist
movement for 50 years he was one of the
founding members of Green Piece back
when they were working primarily on
anti-nuclear campaigns and on campaigns
to protect the remaining whales in the
tragedy of the commons oceans against
over fishing Dr Moore became convinced
that the environmentalist organizations
as such have
been were in the process of being taken
over by um actors whose primary interest
was
not the green movement in the
environmental sense or the peace that
Green Peace once stood for but more the
promotion of a kind of radical
self-interest combined with a hysterical
with the hysterical Doom mongering
that's now typical of the Apocalypse
promoters and so so we go through the
evidence of climate change and
environmental composition over about a
500 million year period concentrating
particularly on the last 2 million years
and present
the hypothetically appropriate
conclusions in that climate denialism
Festival so join us well hello Dr Moore
thank you very much for agreeing to talk
to me and to everybody else on this
platform today uh we met recently in
Vancouver Island it was the first time
I'd heard you speak publicly and I was
very interested in the story you walked
through and so I thought today we could
start with your adventures your Early
Adventures with green peace and what you
were hoping for from that
environmentalist organization and move
from that to your divergences with their
current worldview let's say and and and
the reason that that Divergence was
necessary and and and and right so let's
start with green piece let's let's begin
with that well Jordan I was doing my PhD
in ecology at the University of British
Columbia I had excelled in the Life
Sciences all through high school and in
my undergraduate years mainly interested
in evolutionary biology photo
photosynthesis uh ecology in general and
uh I was radicalized by this by the
Vietnam War the threat of allout nuclear
war and the uh concern for the
environment which was a new thing uh the
word ecology had not yet been used in
the PO popular press it was an obscure
scientific term uh and I think I was the
first PhD colist to graduate in in
Canada as far I know of any
others and uh so I I learned through a
little piece in the newspaper that a a
small group of people were beginning to
meet in the basement of the unarian
church which is a church that accepts
all uh
religions and uh not not that I'm
particularly religious but I agree with
that sort of thing of of peace and and
uh and an end to Waring and all that
sort of thing I'm a pacifist I guess you
could say but I'm also uh fantastically
interested in nature uh and and the
evolution of life from no life to life I
I think there's two things that we can
probably be sure we will never know the
answer to uh one of them is how did Life
Begin and the other one is there anyone
else in this universe besides us uh it
hasn't become apparent to date and we've
got all kinds of listening devices and
and and and we're a young star the sun
is a young star so many of the stars
that would have planets around them that
are billions of years older than our
star you'd think if life was going to
happen on them it might have done so by
now so those are those are kind of my
basic uh philosophies where I I I think
there are things that we can never know
uh many of them probably maybe some that
we don't even know how to uh to speak
about but uh ecology
the science of how all living things are
interrelated not only with other living
things but also with the planet as a
whole and even the solar system because
Saturn has an effect on tides and it has
an effect on these cycles of glaciation
and interglacial periods that have been
going on for 2.6 million years during
the plac ofine Ice Age so that's how I
see the the the world as everything
being interconnected Ed uh and and that
brings me to well what is really the
fundamental meaning of science uh and
scientific discovery science is about
Discovery primarily and I I have three
steps that describe the scientific
method the first one being observation
and if you can't observe something
either with your own senses or with the
machines we've made like x-ray machines
and and and uh all the other things we
have that we can see inside people uh we
can have R you know radiation detectors
and all that sort of thing so they're
part of our ability to observe the
what's going on in nature or in the
world and in the outer world so that
that's what's needed is first
observation and and then second comes
verification where you you observed
something and then you see if it repeats
itself over and over again by very
carefully trying to prevent outside
forces from interfering with the the two
things you're looking at where you think
there might be a cause and an effect
relationship uh and that's mostly what
science is about is discovering cause
effect and so you do that yourself to
make sure that when you tell other
people what you think You' found you
you'll be on Solid Ground and then then
there is replication where other people
see if they can do what you did and if
they can uh especially if it's 100% kind
of thing then you have a theory a
scientific theory and the
reason that most of the scare stories
today are about things that are either
invisible like CO2 radiation and the bad
thing that's supposed to be in GMOs
which doesn't have a name
everything has a name so if it doesn't
have a name it doesn't exist and that's
my opinion of on the subject is there's
nothing in GMOs that is harmful other
otherwise it would probably harm people
and many people are eating them by the
millions so that's just a total hoax as
much as the climate emergency or climate
crisis as they like to call it is a
total hoax because people cannot see
what carbon dioxide is doing they cannot
do the first thing in science which is
observation and therefore for some
reason the sort of mass hysteria effect
uh takes place around many subjects and
so it's not just things that are
invisible though it's also things that
are so remote that no one hardly can go
and look at it for themselves and I use
the two examples of polar bears and
coral reefs very opposite one's in the
hottest Tropics the other's in the
coldest
Arctic but and and hardly anybody gets
to see them I mean I've been lucky I'm
I'm a I'm a diver and a snorkler and
I've been to Indonesia on three two-e
trips to all the coral reefs there which
is the richest in the world happens to
be in also the warmest ocean in the
world and uh yet people can't see for
themselves when they heard in early 2016
that 93% of the Great Barrier Reef was
dying or terminal or in its final
terminal stage as if there were other
terminal stages before the final one and
you notice they never said dead they
said dying terminal or you know oh also
uh
bleached they love to use that word
whereas bleached isn't like bleach that
you make clothes white with bleach means
they've ejected their phytoplankton and
their symbiotic relationship between a
poop which is an animal related to
jellyfish which is in the little holes
in the coral the tin trillions of them
in a very small area and then the
phytoplankton are taken in by the pops
and put under their skin which is
translucent and so they can still
photosynthesize in there and give some
of their sugar to the pop and the pop
gives them protection from predation so
that's it's a perfect example but the
point is last year in the middle of the
summer it was announced by the whole
group of people who are studying the
Great Barrier Reef that in the 36 years
since they've been doing it uh
thoroughly it was the highest Coral
cover yet known
so weigh those things it's 93% dying oh
oh no sorry it's got more cover than it
ever has in the last 36 years and that
gets in some kind amount of media
whereas the other one went worldwide
that it was dying and the the thing is
is that that the highest biodiversity of
all coral reefs is in the warmest ocean
in the world which is Indonesia it's
protected from the north by Asia and
it's protected from the south by
Australia to cold water
incursions that come into the Great
Barrier Reef and many others but it's
it's they say if it gets warmer the
corals will die no they will spread
because we're we're coming out right now
of a
period when the the at the Earth was so
much warmer the eosine thermal maximum
was was happened 15 million years after
the dinosaur extinction which was almost
certainly caused by that asteroid that
hit Yucatan and sent Ash into the
stratosphere where it blocked the Sun
and caused plants to die and mass EX to
occur and uh if if if the planet warms
from what it is now which is actually
one of the coldest periods in the
history of the Earth this is the great
irony now I'll try and go just quickly
into the the the three most important
points about climate change one is that
this is one of the coldest periods in
the history of the earth that's why the
ice caps are huge ice caps are covering
both the North and South Poles there
were forests in the South Pole and there
was no ice in the Arctic until about 3
million years ago since 250 million
years before that when the kuu ice age
which lasted 100 million years uh the
same sort of thing we're in now where
the poles are all covered in big sheets
of ice um since 250 million years ago
when it ended the Earth has been
warmer than it is now so you're focusing
on time frame and this is this is
something that's perplexed me
continually with regards to the both the
climate debate and the carbon dioxide
debate because my sense is that you can
derive whatever conclusion you want
essentially about temperature and about
carbon dioxide and about the
relationship between temperature and
carbon dioxide by merely arbitrarily
choosing a particular period of time to
study now you what what struck me about
the presentation of years that I saw was
that you circumvented that to some
degree by using extremely long spans of
time and so the claim that you just made
let me just lay it out again for
everyone who's watching and listening is
that over the last 250 million years
we've rarely been in a period that's as
cold as it is now and that for much of
that time when there was no shortage
what we never have been okay we never
have been now there have been periods of
time in the Earth's history when the
whole earth was an ice ball how how long
ago were those periods of
time two billion years ago it's
theoretical it it isn't proven
uh it is possible that there were ice
ages that were more extreme than the
three that have occurred in the last
half billion years the saluan was uh a a
shorter Ice Age that occurred when Co
two was at 6,000 parts per million you
know it's four 400 and some now and
they're saying it's going to make the
Earth go on fire uh so and then the the
kuu was 100 million years long that was
during the time when forests evolved uh
and it it was very similar in
temperature to the one we're in now you
see the the international um strateg
graphy institution I think that's not
quite its name but they stratigraphy is
the layers of of the earth that you can
read the ages and the fossils and stuff
like that they have declared this hene
interglacial period as a new epic the
pene is an epic and it's lasted for 2.5
million years and there have been at
least 40 interglacial periods no
different from this one during that time
none of them are EP okay that's a span
of how long did you say the place toine
2.6 million years is it it's arbitrary
but it was going down down down down and
they said okay this is where we'll call
it the place to scene because it had
become so much colder that was than it
was 50 million years ago and and it it
had gone down quickly and then it
leveled off for a while for about
another 10 million years and then it
crashed down to where we are now with
the fact that we are in as cold period
as has ever existed in the past 550
million years now as for ice ball Earth
i i ice ball Earth is too long ago to
have accurate records uh there there's
all kinds of I've read I've read a lot
about it and there's a lot of
speculation involved in it obviously the
world didn't freeze over completely or
there wouldn't be any life here again I
mean life had already occupied all the
oceans of the world by that time and and
there was no life to speak of on land
I'm not sure about bacterial forms I
mean that there's so much we don't know
the reason I don't go back except to say
that photosynthesis and sexual
reproduction both evolved during that
earlier period going back two three
billion years but multicellular life
never came into existence until about
560 million years ago before that
everything every living thing had been
unicellular
microscopic and confined to the
Sea
so that's that to me that's where we
start
really all right so let's get the big
biggest picture here and zoom in a
little bit so 4.5 billion years ago
about we have the emergence of the earth
we have the emergence of Life what three
and a half billion years
ago and we have unb yeah something like
that we have an unbelievably long span
of essentially 3 billion years then when
life is
unicellular 500 million years ago we get
the the emergence of multicellular life
and that's the time when you start to
focus in on the data thinking that at
least in part the evidence for anything
that happened before that is thin and
speculative how good is the evidence of
for or our conception of climate and
Atmospheric composition from 550 million
years ago to now and also from what
sources is that evidence derived like
how do we know what the temperature was
how do we know how much carbon dioxide
there was in the atmosphere across that
500 million year period
and how much more accurate do our
estimates get as the millions of years
progress very good question
uh yes uh we have a a lot of proxies the
the the best evidence started to occur
in 1958 in the international geophysical
year when ships went out all over the
world and drilled deeply into the Marine
sediments to look at various proxies
oxygen 18 is a really important one it
has to do with different rad different
Decay rates of different isotopes of
various elements
uh I'm not an expert on this but I know
that's how it's done also the uh
foraminifera which are a tiny shelled
animal that lives in the sea and and is
a huge of huge abundance we know from
the shape of their shells how long ago
it was along with the uh proxy uh
radiation stuff so we can look deep down
into these sediments and and see the
evolution of life and the first
multicellular life was pretty well all
just like jellyfish there were no shells
yet or
bones and the the the the Clam family
went off to make a shell as like a KN in
armor like a protective plating around
its whole body and made it much less
suceptible to
predation but the bony fish uh decided
Ed to have then they started from way
way back uh you know that same sort of
500 million year period and the skeleton
and the and the central spine became a
very uh desirable thing to have uh to
hold to hold the fleshy part together
and academics could learn from that
Patrick I would say the importance of a
spine you might
say yes
important um so but you'll you'll find
that everything that has a spine can run
pretty fast because we don't have a
shell around us whereas the the the the
the the the B valves and univ valves and
all of the other shell species in the
sea in particular there are freshwater
clams and muscles which is proof that
the oceans won't become so acidic as
they like to say less alkaline is what
they really mean that it's going to melt
all the shells the shelled creatures in
the sea that's ocean acidification I
have a paper on it uh called uh a a a re
basically a relook at this at this idea
because it only emerged the whole idea
of ocean acidification emerged when the
temperature started stopped rising in in
the late 90s there was a a flattening
out period and everybody's going oh no
we have to create a new scare story
because this one isn't working as well
as it used to and uh and that's the kind
of thing that does drives a person nut
me like me nuts because they get away
with this yeah and so the the shelled
creatures though uh can be
uh what's the word for stay in one place
you know sedentary sedentary sedentary
yes and and they can be like oysters and
all those shell
species but the jellyfish are still
around but most of them have ERS so they
don't have to be able to run away too
fast because the other species know that
it's not a very pleasant experience to
swallow one and so all the all these
different uh strains the the philm of
Life many philm have emerged in this 500
milliony year period and the only reason
they're still here is because they were
successful now people say that when I
say well the esine thermal maximum was
like way hotter than it is now there was
no ice anywhere for 250 million years
and life thrived the dinosaurs thrived
if it hadn't been for the asteroid
they'd still be here but it made room
for us mammals to fill the Gap and so
they say but no but humans couldn't have
lived through that no but their
ancestors did if if we wouldn't be here
if our ancestors hadn't lived through
the hot period And so that that this 500
million years gives you abs absolute
proof that the the climate emergency and
and this strong relationship between CO2
and temperature they are out of sync
through that 500 million year period
more than they're in sync and that is
not not a cause effect relationship okay
so let's review this so so far we've
established that we have reasonable
records of climate and atmosphere for a
500 million year period let's say we'
derived that in part from the study of
um radioactive isotopes and partly from
the study of the shells of shelled
animals that have been around for an
extraordinarily long period of time and
so we can get a pretty decent picture of
both climate and
Atmospheric uh composition during that
period of time and what we see is that
for much of that period of time in fact
for all of it in in your estimation um
the planet was in fact much warmer than
it is now to the point where there was
no ice for most of that period of time
on either pole yet during that period
life flourished abundantly also during
that period this 500 million New Year
period for almost all of that time there
Not only was more carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere than there is now there was
like there was way more five times more
10 times more and the consequence of
that was that plants flourished all also
the carbon dioxide and the temperature
during that period are radically out of
sync and not obviously causally related
is does that is that a good summary of
The 500 milliony Year Evidence
so okay well I just say that the The
keru Ice Age lasted 100 million years
the saluan only lasted for about 10
million years ours is only 2.5 million
years and they're declaring it over
without any evidence whatsoever that
it's anything like over as a matter of
fact of the 40 inter glacial periods
that have occurred the the most recent
ones have shown A continuing decline in
the warmth of The warm periods which are
the short periods it goes it takes
85,000 years to sink from where we are
now back to the next major glaciation
see they call it the last ice age the
one that occurred ,000 years ago no it
was the most recent glacial maximum of
which there have been 40 during the
place to St Ice Age and the the amazing
thing is is that the the
cycles that are occurring here are are
asynchronous like for the first half one
and a half million years it was a 40,000
year cycle in keeping with the shape of
the Earth's orbit which is a fected by
the mag by Jupiter's gravitational
field Jupiter affects both our our our
our circle around the it's not a circle
it's a oval but it changes shape in tune
with Jupiter's gravitational effect as
as it goes around the Sun and then the
the the tilt of the earth is is affected
by Jupiter's gravitational effect and so
is the wobble
the North Star won't always be the North
Star because the Tilt wobbles like this
in a 20,000 year cycle right I'm using
round numbers it's 21 or something but
so this period we've had now for the
last 2.5 million years the graph shows
very clearly from Ocean sediment
analysis that it's still getting colder
in the cold periods okay so that's the
pl scene that last two and a half
million years and that's the time that's
been characterized by 40 processions of
ice yes the last of which was the last
ice age no no the most recent M recent
glaciation the ice age is the place to
scene oh yes sorry yes yes and but
people you got that in your head because
they're pouring it into you every day
that it was the last ice age when when
it is this is the last ice age it's
called the place to scene is the
most Ice Age but
we also have these ma glacial maximums
occurring and and and so this is called
the place to scene conundrum because no
one knows quite exactly how that
happened okay so let me rephrase that so
two and a half million per year period
which in in totality is an ice age
that's characterized by the movement and
the re the the movement forward and the
recession of of the ice masses and the
last major movement forward was 20,000
years ago go but we're still in the and
and now are we're at the tail end of the
recession where are we in that process
no we're at the tail end of the
interglacial period if it's anything
like pretty well all of the previous
ones it really only lasts about 10,000
years and the first part of it is warmer
than it is see people are not even
willing to look at 10,000 years they
want to say from
1850 right yes when the industrial era
began now it's the industrial area that
is causing this slight change in in
global temperature when in fact this
change started more like in 1600 that
was the peak of the little ice age as it
was called and it wasn't an Ice Age
either it was just a a a cold period
during an interglacial period during a
warm period so but the little ice age
was the coldest it's been since about
10,000 years ago as it was coming up out
of the real glacial maximum they can't
tell right at the beginning exactly how
many there were and and where you really
start and all that stuff but it's in the
neighborhood of 40 glacial maximums
first on 100,000 year Cycles sudden
switch to 40,000 year Cycles both of
which tie in with the uh Jupiter
gravitational Theory um this was
discovered in the
1920s uh but they didn't have they
didn't have the detail that we have
today um the the fact is is what what I
call it is the most recent glacial
maximum was 20,000 years ago they call
it the last because last can also mean
final as as well as most recent right so
most recent is much more accurate than
final I don't know why
final would would be used unless they
thought it was the last one and and
there's absolutely no evidence for that
because we've already started about
6,000 years ago going downward slowly
till we came to the little ice age and
it was only 400 and some years ago that
that happened people starved in the
Northern parts of Europe because it was
too cold to grow food and and it doesn't
take that much temperature a couple
three degrees Celsius makes the area
where you can grow food move quite a bit
just like the in the glacial maximums
there was a mile of ice over and two
miles of ice and three miles of ice and
around Churchill like four miles of ice
on top of the land and and there was
almost nowhere in Canada that wasn't
completely glaciated a few places where
there's very little precipitation in in
the Alaska area Yukon area but basically
the whole country was covered in a
massive sheet of ice which went way down
into the Northern Tier US states New
York had a mile of ice on it so and was
only 20,000 years ago and that had
occurred Time After Time After Time for
2.5 million years and again there is
absolutely no indication that the place
to scene is anywhere near coming to an
end everything points to it getting
colder or staying the same maybe the
chance of it going back up is 5% if you
look at the evidence as it presents
itself do you ever read the fine print
that appears when you start browsing in
incognito mode it says that your
activity might still be visible to your
employer your school or your internet
service provider to really stop people
from tracking your online activity you
need to do what I do and use expressvpn
think about all the times you've used
Wi-Fi at a coffee shop the airport or
work without expressvpn every site you
visit could be logged by the Admin of
that Network which is still true even
when you're in incognito mode what's
more your home internet provider can
also see and record your browsing data
in the US they're legally allowed to
sell that data to advertisers expressvpn
is an app that encrypts all of your
network data and reroutes it through a
network of secure servers so your
private online activity stays just that
private expressvpn works on all your
devices and it's super easy to use the
app literally has one button you tap it
to connect and your browsing activity is
secure from prying eyes stop lighting
strangers invade your online privacy
protect yourself at expressvpn.com
Jordan use Jordan Link at expressvpn.com
Jordan to get three extra months free
that's ex p s vpn.com Jordan to learn
more okay so if we look at the last 2
and a half million years we're in an age
that's cold enough to frequently have
the progression of the glaciers and
that's happened and they've receded 40
times now you made illusion to some of
the forces that are multiple forces that
are causing that you talked about the
the um the tilt of the Earth's orbit and
the and what would you say the
irregularities in that tilt so that's a
source of variability you
talk if the Earth points more towards
the sun then the solar radiation goes
further north and further south in in
our winter there summer so it it it can
that seems to be where it was triggered
was was by these the Cycles fit
perfectly so you you sort of have to go
well that looks like it's a cause effect
relationship right and and it's happens
so many times and and you said Wobble
the Wobble itself is affected by even
more distal forces like the the
gravitational pole of Jupiter so there's
many many forces at play that are
determining these large scale cycles of
climate over tens of thousands of years
tens of thousands of year
periods and it you don't believe that
there any evidence whatsoever Cycles
upon Cycles upon Cycles upon cyes right
and you don't believe that carbon
dioxide production per se is one of the
major okay so so let's D drag into that
because or drill into that because I'm
going to do everything I can push back
against you to to evaluate that argument
because we want to give the devil is due
so I could say all right so the first
thing I might say is well you could be
right in that there's been a tremendous
amount of Vari
across large spans of time but the rate
of change at the moment since 1850 is
sufficient so that those perturbations
will be hard for natural systems to
adapt to and they threaten the stability
of the cultures that we've generated
predicated as they are on a particular
uh what would you say manifestation of
weather and climate and so the right
span of time is a 200-year period and
not these tens of thousands of years or
millions of years even that you're
insisting upon so how would you respond
to that
objection well John Clouser uh who got
the Nobel Prize in physics in 202 or
three uh has just joined the CO2
Coalition of which I'm a director
founding director and we're a group that
only accepts people that we want to come
in you can't just pay money and be a
member uh we we we know what we're
talking about we've got some of the top
uh atmospheric scientists and Etc in the
world as as as our group and we're also
associated with clintel in Europe uh
which is a climate
International uh Alliance I believe it
stands
for and we're we're pretty much on the
same page because it's the only page
that makes any sense uh the the the fact
is is and John cler said it this
way the difference between the
temperature 200 years ago and the
temperature now and you're going to this
1.5 degrees and the Earth is going burn
up or whatever that's Le that's less
than that's less than between breakfast
and lunch everywhere in the
world 1.5 degrees Celsius it it it is so
stupidly ridiculous to say that a 1.5
degre celsus increase in global
atmospheric temperature is going to be a
disaster as a matter of fact it will
open up vast areas of Farmland that were
too cold before a lot of this I I live
in KOMO uh where I'm just barely halfway
to the North Pole and it's too cold for
things to grow for large parts of the
year and it would be nice if it was
warmer and the other thing that not many
people know is that when the earth warms
uh say back in the day this is many
millions of years ago when it was much
warmer than it is now uh it it it does
so more towards the poles the equator
doesn't change it it it's a a a constant
that like the poles actually became
subtropical uh during some of the
interglacial periods before the Ice Age
came the ice didn't start building up in
Antarctica until about 30 million years
ago and the ice didn't start building up
in the Arctic until about 5 million
years ago the South Pole is always
colder than the North Pole the southern
hemisphere is colder because it's mostly
ocean and it takes a lot more energy to
heat up the oceans than it does to heat
up the land you're only heating up a
little bit like this but the oceans are
like the atmosphere are in in cycle they
they're in lots of different Cycles
exchanges so they're moving heat all
over the place whereas the land doesn't
move heat it just absorbs it and so the
the the the the northern hemisphere has
always been colder than the southern
well since the land masses were
reasonably in the same place they are
now over of course over the hundreds of
millions of years the tectonic plates
have moved around quite a bit and at one
time they were all in one continent with
all the rest of the world being ocean g
gondan land I think that's what that was
mhm um and so the the the flows of heat
uh but the point is is that in the esine
thermal maximum the temperature was at
least 5 to 7 degrees Celsius warmer than
it is now maybe even more and Tropics it
there
were 50 million years ago was the peak
of the esine thermal maximum as it's
called and coming out of the glacial uh
coming out of the dinosaur extinction
there were 15 million years where it
still was going up it had gone it had
gone down about halfway to where it is
now in the middle of this 250 million
year period but it was nowhere near cold
enough for any ice to be on the earth
and at the same time CO2 was going in
the exact opposite direction than the
the the whole of the um temperature was
and that you can see that in in the
graphs that that that there is no clear
relationship but the thing about CO2 is
actually it is a greenhouse gas but
clouds are so much more important you
know water is the most interesting one
because as a gas not mod I also
understand that in the CL the climate
models don't have sufficient resolution
to appropriately model clouds and so so
you talked about 1.5 and that number
has always bothered me because um
I I understand if I'm correct that
that's within the error margin of the
estimates of the forcing effect of water
vapor I understand that it it's a small
enough measurement so that we can't
determine um if it can be validly
detected in terms of an increase given
our inability to model the effects of
clouds I understand that we don't have
temperature measurements from
terrestrial weather stations that are
sufficiently reliable over even a period
of several hundred years to ensure that
our estimates are accurate within a
degree and a half I mean I learned this
not least by reading Michael kton about
or kryon about 20 years ago when he
wrote one of the first exposes on the
climate scam pointing out that most of
our terrestrial weather stations were
placed in outside of cities to begin
with but that they've been the subject
of encroachment by the urban heat
Islands since and that in consequence
their temperature estimates have to be
corrected for that encroachment and
there's error in that measurement as
well so yes and not only that they're
they're playing with the numbers they're
making it seem colder before that
they're actually Noah the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
is
actually it's they're lying they're
they're they're saying oh there's a good
reason to show it was hotter now and
colder then and then they change the
numbers and they're doing it without
telling anybody and then the graphs go
out I mean this whole thing is still
corrupt and it it's basically the
problem is is that politicians who uh
work by scaring people uh that if this
happens you know you vote for me and
I'll make sure this doesn't happen uh
but they quietly get their
bureaucrats to give billions of money to
scientists universities who know that if
they don't go along with the story
they're going to get fired NE never
never mind they actually cannot counter
this without being shunned and have
youve seen what's happened recently with
the big universities and the the the
kind
of horrible stuff coming out from these
people not just on climate but on social
issues and War and all that sort of
stuff and that's not I don't talk about
that too much yeah but I follow it I
follow it very closely and the there
there
there's so so all these scientists
publish all these papers with with Doom
and Gloom as the main theme you don't
see the big corporations doing that sort
of stuff they're trying to make things
that are useful and now they're being
forced into this electric vehicle thing
you know that using fossil fuels to make
electricity is only 35 to 40% efficient
and then you're going to use that use
that electricity to run your car and
it's only so efficient I mean it's more
efficient than burning fossil fuels but
you're burning fossil fuels 65% of all
the electricity in the United States is
still bought by fossil fuels and they're
pretending that that doesn't have any
CO2 emissions because the cars don't
okay so let's let let's turn our
attention momentarily to to the CO2
issue so I became
aware six or seven years
ago of The Greening Global Greening
phenomena so now we've been told for 60
years that as the carbon dioxide rates
increase and the temperatures inexorably
rise that what will inevitably happen is
that the semi arid areas will turn arid
and the deserts will
expand but what's actually happened and
the opp in a yeah not just the opposite
in a little way the opposite in an
absolutely mindblowing and unequivocal
way which is what's happened is that
because we're actually in a carbon
dioxide drought which is also what your
data point to we're down to about 430
parts per million and plants start to
die at 150 parts per million the plants
are literally gasping for metaphorically
gasping for breath and so they have
their stomata open too wide and that
means they lose a lot of water and that
means that the semiarid areas in the
Earth are wider than they should be
larger than they could be could be so
now carbon dioxide levels have gone up
and not even that much and the
consequence of that is that the plants
are thriving in comparison and this has
happened over only a 20year period and
so the the amount of the earth that's
greened since the year 2000 is
equivalent to the total land area of the
United States right it not only that
there's been a market Improvement in
Crop Production it's like 13 to 15% so
not only is the planet not desertify
it's doing the opposite and near the
deserts right in semi-arid areas Plus
instead of that being a threat to food
production it's actually enhanced food
production worldwide so my sense is that
if we weren't ideologically addled and
we were looking just at the straight
data with the with the eyes of let's say
new investigators we'd look at the
release of carbon dioxide of the of the
plant-based carbon dioxide
sequestration from the fossil fuel
reservoirs as the return of a necessary
nutrient to the atmosphere and we would
consider it a net positive and so what
do you think about that is that like I
just can't any other conclusion when I
found out that the the area of green on
the planet had expanded that much in 20
years it was well it was I didn't know
what to to think of that because not
only does it indicate that the
desertification by carbon dioxide
hypothesis is erroneous it's actually
the opposite of that it's literally an
anti-truth the notion that carbon
dioxide will cause desertification and
it seems to me that environmentally
oriented people should be thrilled that
the planet has become substantially
Greener and that agricultural land is
more productive because it means we'd
have to use less of it so you know I've
gone so far as to delude myself into
thinking that adding carbon dioxide to
the atmosphere is one of the most
effective ways we could possibly
distribute fertilizer so given that we
need to burn fossil fuels for all sorts
of other reasons and so that's so far
away from the current narrative that it
seems like a delusion so what do you
think of that what do you make of that
you studied well um yes it that's all of
what you said is absolutely true and
many of us like you and I know about
this and it falls on deaf ears for some
reason and and I go back to uh burning
witches and throwing virgins into
volcanoes um people did these things and
the rest of the people accepted it or
even supported it and so I I what is it
some kind of collective Death Wish
because the fact is during the most
recent glacial maximum as I like to call
it 20,000 years ago CO2 sank to 180 PPM
in the atmosphere that's because when
the oceans cool they absorb more CO2 and
when they warm they outgas CO2 I I use
the example of taking a glass of cold
water out of the fridge and putting it
on your counter
in a few minutes bubbles begin to form
on the glass inside that's the gas
coming out of the water put it back in
the fridge they disappear so Henry's law
is the is an actual scientific
formula that determines the equilibrium
between CO2 in the water and in the
atmosphere and given that the water is
70% of the land's area this is a fairly
major factor in things and so it went
down to 180 and as you know at 150
plants die right so it is thought that
many of the high elevation plants did
die for lack of CO2 because as you go up
the air thins out so 150 150 parts per
million becomes a lower number as you go
up yeah and and so that because there's
Ash Ash deposits at those altitudes that
seem seem to be like pervasive uh and I
think that's a logical
conclusion uh I mean in other words it
it's not a bad
hypothesis uh because it was
solo and and and so I say that human
emissions of CO2 are a Salvation not not
a not a destructive tragedy or emergency
or crisis it is actually that we this
species has not only figured out how to
build airplanes and spaceship and
computers but we have also reversed the
continuous downward trend for the last
500 million years with a few blips up
and down in between but for the last
say 150 million years it's been a steady
downward line starting with with regards
to carbon dioxide percentage from 2500
PPM 150 million years ago to 180 20,000
years ago and when we came out of that
most recent glaciation took about 10,000
years to get up to what's called the
holine climate
Optimum because the first 10 the first
5,000 years of the whole scene were
warmer than it is now the Sahara was
green CO2 was a little bit higher it
went up to about 280 after the after the
the 180 the warming of the oceans caused
outgassing and made it 280 by the time
industry began and then industry has
taken it from 280 to 42 five or six or
something right now and it just keeps
getting greener but but the Sahara's not
green
yet because it is I've read that it's
shrinking on its Southern
expanse yes it is but uh the the fact is
there are do red dots on maps showing
all the villages that were all across
the Sahara Desert with goat herders and
sheep and stuff like back then for for
thousands of years and one of the
reasons they say the Egyptian
civilization began was they all had to
move into the Nile Valley uh because it
was the only place where there was
enough water to live and the Sahara
became a desert 6,000 years ago or 5,000
something like that but anyways that's
the time when when everybody had to Mo
move and and that created one of the
first big Urban centers along with the
Middle
East are you tired of feeling sluggish
rund down or just not your best self
take control of your health and vitality
with balance of nature balance of nature
fruit and veggie capsules are the most
convenient way to ensure you're getting
your daily intake of fruits and
vegetables balance of nature uses an
advanced cold vacuum process that
encapsulates fruits and vegetables into
Whole Food supplements without
sacrificing their natural antioxidants
the capsules are completely void of
additives fillers extracts synthetics
pesticides or added sugar the only thing
in balance of nature fruit veggie
capsules are fruits and veggies you need
nutrients to function at your best each
and every day and balance of nature
helps you do just that go to balance ofn
nature.com and use promo code Jordan to
get 35% off your first fruit and veggie
set and an additional $10 off every
additional set you buy that's balance of
nature.com promo code
Jordan okay so so so let me let me
extend
the criticism of the current climate
apocalypse mongering on a different
ground and then let's let's investigate
for a a brief period of time why this
story might be making itself manifest
you already pointed to some degree to
the corruption of the scientific
Enterprise but but there's that's not
the whole story so so um my license in
Canada to practice is is being
threatened right by my professional
board one of the reasons for that by the
way is that some complainant some random
complainant in the United States who I
never had any professional dealings with
whatsoever like all the people who
complained about me by the way submitted
the entire transcript of a Joe Rogan
interview that I did on where I
discussed climate in some of the same
ways that we're discussing it and one of
the things I pointed out was that the
models that we use are radically
dependent on a set of initial
presuppositions they're not very
accurate in their estimates of such
things as terrestrial temperature they
don't model water vapor well or clouds
and and so they're and they're not data
they're models and so they're not
reliable and then they are fueled in
their development by the people who want
the apocalypse mongering to continue so
that makes me very skeptical of them but
then there's something even worse they
use those models to generate 100-year
prognostication which is a long way out
there and and that means the farther you
go out with your models the more the
errors multiply but then they stack an
economic model on top of that and claim
that the consequence of the 1.5 degree
elevation in temperature is computable
economically one century from now and
that the consequences will be
devastating well you know I read all of
Bjorn lamberg's careful work and Bjorn
has accepted the ioc prognostications
about temperature increase and he's
calculated what that's likely to cost us
in relationship to the fact that our
economies continue to grow and that
people are flourishing and his
conclusion is that not only is there no
climate apocalypse because that's a
complete bloody lie in the way that you
just described but there's also no
economic uh uh apocalypse even if the
climate scientists are right because our
proclivity to become more productive
will radically overwhelm the slight
detrimental effect of any climate
transformation and so anyways for
stating all that that's part of the
reason that my license as a clinical
psychologist is being threatened which
is you know sort of an indication of the
current state of the world and so I
don't know if you have anything to say
about the economic models or if we
should just leave that lie and so so
what do you think of that line of
reasoning economics is sort of in the
middle of real hard
science uh and I don't know naturopathy
or something um not that not that I
don't agree with a lot of naturopathy
but it's soft versus hard science type
thing and you know it's just so insane
that they are doing this because the
ipcc itself the inter intergovernmental
panel on climate change uh part of the
United Nations apparatus it's partly the
Meteorological association uh and the
Environmental Center in Nairobi and
they're very political of course but
twice during the publication of their
large volume they they they have a a
public one for the public but they also
have a big volume that they put out
every four years and twice they have
said to effect it is impossible
to determine future climate
Trends you see chaos the very definition
of chaos is you is that you can't see
through
it I I I've been a Boer all my life and
built a few of them too and uh I love
the bow
wave uh because at at a certain speed
you're you're going slow and it's a
beautiful laminer flow around B it's
there's no
turbulence and then you get going a
little faster a little faster it becomes
turbulent and frothy it's impossible to
predict where each of the atoms are in
that chaotic system and that's the same
thing as the climate there's no
possibility that anybody can predict the
future with a
computer it's especially well you can
predict some things with a computer if
you've got a perfectly linear thing that
they looking at yeah but you can't
predict something as complicated as the
global climate another point I'd like to
make is that you know people are saying
that it's going to get too hot to live
on the earth we are a tropical species
we're not polar bears that's why we're
not covered in massive fur coats because
we we evolved at the equator and we we
stayed there for a very very long time
and couldn't come out of there even my
place here in Baja on the of cancer is
too cold for people if they don't have
shelter and fire so I believe that the
control of fire was the beginning of the
species called
humans and that it went from there to
clothing and needles for knitting hides
together and then nice houses and with
nice fireplaces and lots of wood around
and you know one of the reasons the
forest fires are so bad in the western
us is they don't clean the wood off the
ground and they let trees die and just
stand there back in the day before there
was any fossil fuels every village every
tribe every town every city they
collected all the dead wood for miles
around their Dwelling Places and used it
for their firewood in the winter because
it was dry already and easy to get
because it was already on the ground
right and so people don't recognize that
and you got to manage a forest properly
if you don't want it to turn into a
conflagration like they have done in
California and many of the other Western
States but back to uh
clouds Joanie Mitchell I've looked at
clouds from both sides now from up and
down and still somehow it's clouds
Illusions I recall we really don't know
clouds at
all she said one of the most prophetic
scientific things of any modern singer
and this is true we cannot predict the
clouds and and they have multiple forces
they they reflect sunlight off the top
they keep the Earth's heat in at the
bottom they rain all over the place and
make everything wet and then you've got
the fact that that
H2O name me another compound that has
all three states gas liquid and solid
the ice has a huge effect too when it
comes like it has now
so water is really the one that we
should be focusing on right right right
but I don't think I don't think we would
come to the conclusion that we should
get rid of the water in the same way
they're saying we should get rid of the
CO2 these people who are building
billion dooll things to to store CO2
yeah I know CO2
cration St they they really they really
should be put in Chains and not allowed
to do that you know it's so ridic
it'd be just as effective to go to door
too with a with a pistol take people's
money and burn it in the
backyard it's it's equally insane okay
so so it is about that's a good yeah
it's about it's about us insane okay so
so let's let's look underneath this and
this also will tap into something
paradoxical about you I would say so let
me lay this out and tell me Tell and
then you tell me what you think about it
okay so
my sense is that the great climate
apocalypse narrative emerged essentially
out of the concerns of people like the
club of Rome and the concerns in the
1960s that the human race was going to
that we were basically we could be
modeled like mold in a Petri dish and
that we would expand our population till
we consumed all available resources and
perish in a in a cataclysm and that that
had to be stopped and that was the sort
of um dire situation put forth by the
biologist Paul Erick for example who's
been beating this drum ever since the
mid-60s okay so the club of Rome people
got together in the mid 60s and they
decid decided that there were way too
damn many people on the planet something
radical had to be done about that which
is a bit of a dangerous presumption in
my estimation right and a bit of an
anti-human presumption but um in any
case
the consequence of that was the
emergence of the more radical side of
the environmentalist movement now I
hesitate to say just that and this is
where I would really like your input
because there are a number of reasons
for wise people to be cautious and
concerned about the relationship between
human beings and the and the broader
ecological system so I spent a lot of
time analyzing human effects on the
so-called environment and I came to the
conclusion that we're misdirecting our
apocalyptic attention in a variety of
pathological matters because for example
I think that the fact that we're we've
devastated the um Natural Abundance of
the coastal Waters and really intensely
in the last 100 years is a much more
pressing concern than our production of
carbon dioxide but it's a concern that
it is possible to get people to attend
to now it's not the only environmental
concern so you could imagine that there
are genuine environmental concerns and
then there's this anti-human screeching
about
overpopulation and the combination of
those two forces drives the demand for
an apocalyptic narrative and then that
feeds into the politicians venal wish to
be seen as the saviors for a problem
whose progress towards solving can't be
measured and that also enables them to
Proclaim themselves as something like
the saviors of the natural world right
so so the reason I'm asking you this is
because I'm trying to delve into the
reasons why they apocalypse narrative
surrounding climate got going to begin
with now you were there at the onset of
the environmental movement say with the
with the green peace types and you had
your environmental concerns so what was
driving your concern at the onset and
the concern of your compatriots and why
did your paths
deviate so we're we're
talking you were you were trying to get
me started on that at the beginning and
we got off on too many other things but
yeah I'd like to explain why I joined
Green Peace and why I left Green Peace I
I think I did say that I was doing a PhD
in ecology and that led me into
environmental concerns and there was
hydrogen bombs being detonated by the
United States in the illustion islands
and there was still atmospheric testing
of nuclear weapons by France and French
Polynesia and that was the first Target
of green Peace's campaign it it was
Green Peace the peace in in in Green
Peace is about people it's not about the
environment green is about the
environment and so we were at the
beginning uh we were actually doing
humanitarian work rather than an
ecological work in some ways I mean we
were trying to stop the possibility of
an allout nuclear war by waking people
up to the arms race and all of that that
was going on at the time
and that was when 1971 was 1971 was the
voyage to to amchitka uh with 12 of us
on a small fishing boat 85 foot boat
crossed the Pacific Ocean got arrested
by the Coast Guard made molter kronites
evening news and had tens of thousands
of people marching in the streets and so
uh there were lots of other people
involved but we were the tip of the
spear on that because we got up out of
and did something and quit our regular
lives and went on a three-month uh
campaign uh on a on an old fishboat uh
and learned a whole lot of stuff and had
a great time and uh and and because we
we all had a a motto the this the the
revolution should be a
celebration uh not killing people and
stuff and so we did that and then the
next year we've had such success we had
defeated the world's most powerful
organization the US Atomic energy
Commission because they stopped their
next test that they were going to do
Nixon did that and it was very shortly
after this the bomb we were going
against they did set that one off I
guess they couldn't lose that much face
but uh they they stopped that program so
we said well let's head for Mero atle in
French Polynesia and sto the atmospheric
tests and it only took two years to do
that in a 20 6 foot sailboat going from
New Zealand while the rest of us went
over to Europe and the first thing we
did was we asked for an audience with
the Pope which he gave us and mentioned
our name during his speech from up on
his porch there uh and that was pretty
thrilling and and then we went to Paris
and occupied Notre Dam Cathedral just a
half a dozen of us handing out pamphlets
because even lemand at that time was
controlled by the state no one in France
knew about the atmospheric nule test in
French Polynesia it wasn't a subject to
be discussed and so we handing out these
pamphlets and then we sat in the pews
and as it was time for closure The Sur
came in and we said we are occupying
this church overnight as a de a
demonstration and they said excuse me
sir but this is not a church it is a
national monument and you will come to
jail with us if you don't get out of
here right now so we're we're actually
quite smart about these things we didn't
want to to jail and we got out but we
made leemon the next morning for the
first time there had been a story about
the French atmospheric nuclear testing
and then we went to Stockholm where the
first international meeting on the
environment took place uh where where uh
they were talking about all kinds of
environmental things but they sure
weren't going to talk about nuclear
that's what the the superpowers as they
were called in the nuclear weapon States
uh made it very clear that war was not
an environmental issue and so therefore
atmospheric testing wasn't an
environmental issue even though it was
sending radiation around the whole
southern hemisphere for months of the
year and uh but but we didn't go to the
alternative conference in all of these
conferences there's an alternative
hippie conference with colorful flags
and dancing girls and all that sort of
thing we went to the real conference
because six months earlier Jim Bolan and
his his wife Marie and I Jim B was one
of the the leaders of the early
Greenpeace group
he's engineer who worked with buck Mr
Fuller on the on on the domes up north
the D line domes really smart guy and I
went I went with him as an ecologist and
and his wife and we Lobby every southern
hemisphere country especially the ones
on the Pacific about the situation and
that we were going to send a boat and
all that stuff and then we went to the
Stockholm conference and convinced the
French uh sorry the New Zealand
delegation who had been the sort of
strongest against this all along and uh
the New Zealand delegation put a motion
on the floor
against uh atmospheric nuclear testing
and won by a landslide so it was a great
embarrassment uh to them all and the
next year they quit they they did do one
more one more year yeah they did but
then they went underground and now now
they're not doing it at all and then
they sank our boat in New Zealand with
with with L with bombs on the on the
hull while people were in it one person
died uh that was that was that was the
only time uh there was a fatality during
a Greenpeace campaign we were very
careful at our boat with our boats
because boats can kill people pretty
quick if the weather gets bad and uh and
I've been I've been I grew up on a
floating village so there was nothing
but boats
and uh my dad's logging camp in Winter
Harbor on the North tip of Vancouver
Island which we still have a family
compound there we we're not in the
forestry business anymore but we were
for about a hundred years and uh so I
grew up on a tide flat with a dock and a
few houses and uh a couple of rivers and
a lot of forest and so I I I was
naturally interested in uh in nature uh
so I I joined Greenpeace we went on
these voyages and as time went on we
then uh moved into uh more environmental
issues uh such as uh toxic waste
pollution uh cleaning up the rivers in
Europe North America had already passed
passed good clean water and air acts
earlier than we were in The Late Late n
late 60s but Europe had not and every
almost every Big River the elb the Ry
the river in London temps uh they were
pretty much dead and so we got a smaller
boat the river boat we called it about a
50 foot boat and went up these rivers
with divers and plugged the pipes of the
factories that were putting poison in
the rivers underwater where no one could
see it going in and so we plugged the
pipes and it backed up into the
factories and that made the newspapers
happy and uh we won and so that that was
good
and then
uh about the early 80s a change occurred
where environmental groups were now
describing the human species as the
enemies of the earth great cancer on the
planet yeah amp you know disaster for
human for for life and all of that so we
kind of the green got dropped sorry the
piece got dropped out of the green piece
and uh but I it's too much like original
sin for me to think that humans are the
only evil animal on the planet or evil
species on the planet uh I just don't go
for that I'm not into that and but the
but I stayed for a bit even though they
were saying these things and how did
that happen What like why do you think
that
happened what what
changed we were infiltrated by the
political left yeah so that was aist it
was a it was a Marxist incursion yeah
yeah that that makes perfect sense yeah
cuz that that kind of puts that anti-
capitalist spin on it right yeah yeah
then what happened Jordan is in an
international meeting of which I was one
of the directors and we had maybe 50
people around the table by this time
from all kinds of
countries David mctaggert who was our
chairman and and had become so in
political ways uh and I negotiated the
founding of Green Peace International
with him in a conflict over the use of
the word Green Piece uh the San
Francisco office was trying to take it
away from us the founding office and of
course the the US has 20 times the
fundraising capacity as Canada and so it
became a civil war within Greenpeace and
and I we got my our lawyer negotiated
with me and David the the contract of
Greenpeace International which he would
become chairman and I would be the
representative for Canada and the
representative for us and a
representative Australia
Germany uh Germany Netherlands UK we had
nine or 10 countries all with offices by
this time and good fundraising going on
and uh so David was one of these people
who is scared of chemicals right
chemophobia it's been described as it's
sort of like being scared of the climate
uh and he decided with advice from
others that Greenpeace should start a
campaign to ban chlorine worldwide with
capital
letters and I'm going you
guys salt is sodium chloride it is an
essential nutrient it is why Gandy
marched to the sea to make salt because
the Brits were were taxing the poor
people of India for an essential
nutrient that they couldn't afford and
so come on but not only that adding
chlorine to drinking water was the
biggest advance in the history of Public
Health and to spas and Pools and Hot
Tubs Etc and 85% of our Pharmaceuticals
are based on chlorine chemistry and 25%
of them actually have chlorine in them
if you look at your cold medicine you'll
see a little CL there on a lot of them
and so I said we can't do that you guys
we cannot ban chlorine worldwide if you
have a particular chlorinated compound
that you think should be banned from
industry or whatever let me know but I'm
gone if you do that and I was gone and
it was Peaceable was friendly um but I I
I was gone and I went home to my Winter
Harbor home and with my brother and
brother-in-law we started a salmon farm
just when Norway was taking off with
that industry and I ran a salmon farm
for 10 years and in the end we couldn't
grow them for as cheap as they were
being sold because the market it's one
of those things where the market just
flips and suddenly you're in a buyer's
market
the early days we were in a sellers
market and it's a beautiful product and
I still eat a lot of salmon in
particular the this the steel head that
are being grown in freshwater that
they've got some way of making rainbow
trout get this big uh in freshwater and
de Baker Lake is one of the main uh
places where they're growing them and so
is the Columbia River and it's a
fantastic product and your comment about
the the sea uh did did did you read the
book The Tragedy of the commons by
Garrett Hardy yes do you know that one
yes yeah it's it it really laid it out
very clearly that unless you have and
this is why this whole thing about no
borders is as completely
ridiculous you have to have
jurisdictions if you're going to stop
over fishing and over whatever right
right right uh and and the the
international oceans
are are are the place where this should
be figured out somehow and and actually
Canada and the United States and Japan
and Russia all have a treaty over crabs
and salmon uh that keeps it from being
overfished and gives quotas and all that
sort of thing so it is being practiced
in some places the Atlantic side though
there's 25 countries out there and uh
and Japan is you know they don't they
don't care who says what they they own
the sea and
and and they're very I mean and then
they're on an island and you can sort of
I mean it's sort of like England yeah
like Great Britain in that way and as
you know the French and the English have
been fighting over whose fish they are
for a long long time and uh the same
thing goes on in other parts of the
world too and and my my my grandfather
was and his three brothers were salmon
fishermen out of Winter Harbor and my
dad married his daughter and uh logger
and a fisherman and that's what we were
up there that was about all there was
there was no Road there was no road to
Winter Harbor when I was a child until I
was 16 and uh when the road finally came
a 75 mile Gravel Road from Port Hardy
across the North End of of Vancouver
Island to the most westerly Port Winter
Harbor on the island and and and and on
the very near the very tip of it we
thought wow now this place is going to
Boom half the people use the road to get
out
that's that's human nature for you
because they had to stay there all year
and many of them never got out at all
because they couldn't afford to go to
town because getting to town was a
two-day trip on a two boats a a taxi and
and and a big steamer going to Vancouver
the north and south of Vancouver Island
weren't joined together by roads until
about the
1970s so the North Island was a whole
other place cool place to grow up
so when you started
to separate yourself from Green Peace
you said that the two things happened to
Green Peace if if I've got it right one
was the incursion of the Marxist anti-
capitalist types and and the anti-human
types as well who were proclaiming that
human beings were something
approximating a cancer on the face of
the planet so it's a real radicalization
of the green element then there's the
incursion of the marxists and you also
said that there was some um what would
you say neurotic over concern with
chemicals as such right so that's
something more like a it's more like a
phobia than a than a reasoned position a
new paper just came out that said there
are more than 9,000 toxic chemicals in
plastic and they didn't name one of them
but they did find 9,000 of them in there
apparently and that's the kind of stuff
that's coming out they've been saying
that plastic is toxic forever it is the
primary product used in healthcare for
for blood bags for vinyl tubing you can
take vinyl is the most interesting
plastic because it and it contains
chlorine polyvinyl chloride so it's the
the only uh one of these
polymers the Plastics that has chlorine
in it and because it has that different
chemistry it's able to absorb nearly
anything you can put uh
anti germ chemicals into it and you can
use it as flooring and wall covering in
hospitals so that the germs can't grow
on the floor of the walls and all the
Glo gloves and caps and and all kinds of
things are made out of plastic in
healthcare because it is non-toxic
that's the whole point of it did I go
into the the the Marine plastic the the
Great Pacific Garbage Patch we haven't
talked about that have we no no no well
so it it it's it's um it's easy for an
the environmental movement to be
captured in a variety of ways and that's
essentially what seemed to happen in the
1980s so what now how exactly did did
you separate yourself from the group and
when did you start to become aware that
the climate issue was a a tempest in a
te part let's say or even or even
something antithetical to the truth and
what has been the consequence for you of
that Discovery Well I pretty early on I
realized that CO2 was one of the most
Essential Elements for life on Earth and
all of those things I mean and and
between CO2 and water uh there's nothing
else that comes close to the importance
of those two molecules that nitrogen
would be the next thing you would think
about and uh n nitrogen is interesting
in that life cannot absorb nitrogen
directly it has to go through nitrogen
fixing bacteria uh to and that and they
they they are in Plants mostly in the
roots of plants and the nitrogen fixers
uh are what makes gives the nitrogen to
life we can't we nit nitrogen is a is a
really really weird element uh but
nitrogen NO2 n nitrogen nitrogen dioxide
it would be called uh
we can't metabolize it it has to be
broken down by microscopic life forms in
order for us to to be able to live so I
see after learning all these things
um it's just so clear to me that we we
are not
evil uh in in the collective sense uh
but at the same time we there is this ma
Mass confusion issue where people dress
up in weird costumes and glue themselves
to roads and throw tomato juice at Mona
Lisa and all this ridiculous stuff you
know I mean it's absolutely ridiculous
but and what they're what they want I'm
not quite sure they keep saying they
want the climate to get better but it is
a fact that we are a tropical species
and we would also well the
environmentalists also tend to be
stridently anti-nuclear which is
extremely strange if their primary
concern is actually carbon dioxide so
you know that's a real that's a real
conundrum in my estimation because that
seems like an obvious Way Forward if if
that's actually your concern I mean you
can you can have an intelligent debate
about the relative merits of nuclear but
if you're convinced that carbon dioxide
is going to destroy the planet then
nuclear seems a perfectly reasonable
alternative but the greens also
fulminate actively against nuclear
plants and are having them closed down
in places like California and and in
Germany much to the detriment both of
the economy and the environment the
Germans turned to burning lignite
because they closed their because they
closed their nuclear plants which is so
they managed to come out of the the
green energy movement producing more
carbon dioxide more particulate matter
less energy less reliable energy they
increased their dependence on the
fascist regimes that provide fossil
fuels like Russia and they Quint toppled
the price of energy so that's nobody
nobody said logic would Prevail that's
for sure because the real the real
problem is is in the
beginning the the the political side of
of the
movement Associated nuclear war and
nuclear power right right and they
should nuclear nuclear energy should be
in the same category as nuclear medicine
not as nuclear war right nuclear yeah
nuclear energy is one of the the most
wonderful things and we've had 30 years
of stagnation and even reduction there's
over still over aund 100 reactors in
North America and not one person has
died from nuclear plant in North America
Three Mile Island didn't kill anybody
Fukushima didn't kill anybody it was a
comedy of stupid idity that Fukushima
thing that first they
built four reactors 8 feet above sea
level where they knew there had been
tsunamis in the
past second right that seems like a bad
idea yeah the backup generators for if
the the uh plant went down which they
had to at the earthquake they had to
shut all the plants down but they also
lost access to the grid the power lines
went down so they all they had was their
backup diesel generators they started
them up everything worked fine for an
hour but guess where the diesel
generators were in front of the reactors
towards the sea on skids they weren't
even nailed down they didn't have any
houses around them and the gas tanks the
diesel tanks were connected by a hose
and they were also on their own set of
skids and the tsunami came and just took
them up in the mountain somewhere and
that was the end of that and then one by
one they melted down and then even
stupider each of those glass Towers
those are the westing house style of
reactor the G the GE ones are sorry
those are the GE reactor no yes that's
right the westing house one is the one
with the Dome like Three Mile Island uh
and all that is is a protection from the
weather the reactor is is is down low
and and surrounded by a concrete
structure so those are just in case
there's a leak and they don't want water
falling on the reactor or whatever
and the but when the melted a core
produces hydrogen by the disassociation
of water because the the cladding around
the fuel is a is is a catalyst for water
separation so it makes hydrogen which
goes up into those towers and as soon as
hydrogen gets to 8% any spark causes a
massive explosion and they let that
happen three times in a row on three
separate days because thee Minister you
see in in the United States at least
probably Canada too if there's an
accident at a nuclear plant the head of
the plant phones the prime minister or
the president and briefs them on what's
Happening and what he is doing about it
in Japan you breef them on what's
Happening and then ask permission if you
can do some things and he said no to the
breaching of those Towers because he
didn't want those uh the the radiation
that was in them to get get out three m
Island just if let it get out Three Mile
Island would have blown up too if they
had not let the hydrogen out and there's
so little radiation there's so little
radiation it isn't even consequential
and this whole fear of radiation is just
another fear of an invisible thing that
you can't see what it's doing and and
and the rules have been made so strict
that it's almost doubled the price of
building and maintaining nuclear
reactors which is absolutely unnecessary
whereas with windmills and solar panels
they're getting massive
subsidies uh and and China's
strategy is to build lots of solar
panels and windmills for themselves and
then export even more than that and Tack
another 10% onto them so theirs are
pretty well free and that that's what's
going on there this whole thing about
electric vehicles I
mean I thought it was a free country but
not when it comes to CO2 so we are
allowing carbon dioxide which is
actually one of the most important and
benign substances in this world
absolutely the most essential element
for life because we are carbon-based
life all life is carbon based and there
is absolutely no evidence that it is
having any effect whatsoever on the
temperature theoretically it might have
a little bit but it doesn't show in the
record that has any
significant there's obviously many other
things that are far more important in in
in determining the temperature of the
earth and one of them is the position of
the tectonic plates these cycles that
we've seen the ice ages and such that
the oceans are ocean currents on top and
Diving below at the poles when it
reaches four degrees C I mean it's it's
all water is also the only liquid that
gets lighter as it gets colder that's
why it
any other liquid that the the the solid
would float go to the bottom so if if
water acted like any other element any
other liquid the The Ice would have
built up to within about 15 feet of the
surface that's all you'd have and right
life may not have evolved in the oceans
under those circumstances let's review
Patrick because we're going to run out
of time and I want to just make sure
that we've covered everything and give
you a chance to make a few final
comments as well so we started out by
talking about the fact that we have
decent records of both climate and
atmosphere over about a half a billion
year period and that was about the time
when multicellular life evolved and we
can detect
atmospheric change and temperature
looking at uh the remnants of life in
the in the sary strata and using um the
the activity of activity of elements
that decay in a radioactive and
predictable Manner and what we see
across that large period of time are
three things we see a a planet that's
often much warmer than it is now up to 7
degrees warmer and that's a planet where
life is perhaps even more abundant
because of the additional warmth we see
an atmosphere that almost across that
entire span has far more carbon Dio than
it does now and we see very little
evidence of a profound relationship
between carbon dioxide proportion and
temperature and
then okay okay so good we've got that
we've got that established and now over
the last two and a half million years
we're in an Ice Age the place to scene
and that ice age is characterized by
periodic movements forward of the ice
and recession and there's been about 40
of them and at the moment we're actually
in a a period That's not only cold by
immense standards hundreds of millions
of years but relatively cold by the
Pline standard and also characterized by
an almost fatal absence of carbon
dioxide that so we're close to the point
where plants start to get desperate and
we're already at the point where if you
give them more carbon dioxide they
actually grow a lot better and so what
we're actually doing by burning fossil
fuels is returning to the atmosph spere
the carbon dioxide that was actually
sequestered in the remains of plants and
giving the plants an opportunity to
flourish which is what they're doing in
consequence of carbon dioxide production
as we know because an area the size of
the United States has greened in the
last two decades and our crops are
actually more abundantly productive than
they have been and then we all that all
of that is true okay and then we also
pointed to the fact that in the 1960s
and then again in the 1980s an
environmental movement that had its
utility because human beings should act
as stewards for the planet got demented
first by the overpopulation Advocates
who were freaking out about like Paul
erck about something that just not only
was not going to occur but didn't occur
which was the widespread famine that was
predicted in consequence of the
population explosion combined with the
incursion of the marxists into the
environmental movement and a kind of
phobia about industrial activity and
nuclear activity that developed in
Tandem and so here we are now spending
Untold tens of billions of dollars
fighting against an invisible enemy that
can't be measured properly that is
actually more likely to be in the final
analysis our
Ally there's no doubt whatsoever there's
no doubt whatsoever that our emissions
of CO2 are the salvation of life on
Earth The Next interglacial Period the
next glacial maximum which is expected
to be about 70,000 years from now it
would go below 150 if it had continued
on the same path it was on I've got the
graph made out very clearly that it
would it might take two more inter two
more glacial uh maximums for it to get
to the earth dying but it would get to
the earth dying there was no way that
that was going to be stopped after 150
million years of continuous decline I'd
like to talk just for a minute about the
Great Pacific Garbage Patch and and the
issue of Pacific of of plastic in the
oceans it's nothing but beneficial in
the oceans in the same way that
Driftwood is is beneficial in the oceans
and actually many species of wood have
toxic substances in them to prevent them
from rotting like like Cedar for example
and Redwood they have quite a few toxic
substances in them and they won't build
playgrounds with them anymore in case
the children bite the wood or whatever
they're supposed to do um but the fact
is there's two reasons why Driftwood is
important in the sea first it becomes a
habitat or a feeding ground for many
many species of marine life but muscle
especially uh deep sea uh Barnacles
goose neck Barnacles they just grow all
over them and then other things eat
those and so there's there's nothing
wrong with it whatsoever and that of
course they say it turns toxic when it
goes in the ocean and I go yeah are you
kidding we wrap all our food in plastic
to keep it from becoming contaminated
and then you say when it goes in the
ocean it becomes a toxic Hazard like
give me a break it doesn't change its
chemistry it's one of the most inert
things in the world you keep saying it
takes 2,000 years to break down and then
you say it's all turned to microplastic
and it's getting lodged in the livers
and kidneys of fish which is another lie
because microplastic of course is
invisible and no one's ever actually
found any but uh but the other wonderful
thing is that the Pacific Garbage Patch
is a fake doesn't exist go on the
internet and look for images of the
Pacific Garbage Patch and you will see
that they are all photoshopped there's
not a single one of them that shows an
actual patch of plastic twice the size
of Texas which is what they said but
nobody can see it so it might as well be
invisible just like polar bears and
coral reefs it's in that's that's why I
titled my book f invisible catastrophes
and threats of
Doom because all of the all of these
socalled catastrophy stories are based
on things that are either invisible
or are remote I call it the universal
theory of scare
stories and there's this this fantasy in
physics that there will be a universal
Theory of Everything someday like time
all the different right right right I
doubt I doubt that'll happen but I don't
think the world is that unified uh to be
able to do that but it is true that uh
the universal theory of scare stories is
a fact that they are do they deal with
all of them deal with things that are
either invisible or remote or in the
case of GMOs
non-existent and then the other thing is
is that seabirds benefit from plastic
immensely all birds have a gizzard and
they don't have teeth so they have to
swallow things
whole some of them have sharp beaks to
tear things apart but they still have to
take big gulps and if it's something
that can't be easily digested in an acid
stomach which they also have they have
two stomachs one like ours and another
one though where they they Shorebirds I
mean landbirds and Shorebirds put
Pebbles they all their life they swallow
Pebbles as the grinding agent in their
gizzard and when the chicks are on the
nest they have to bring pedals Pebbles
to the chicks well Albatross and other
seabirds there's no Pebbles out in the
ocean there so they use pmus as their
favorite thing but it's not available
all the time because it comes from under
sea volcanoes that aren't erupting all
the time but when they find that they
make a cach of it and the other thing
they use is bits of wood that are of the
appropriate size and shape and today
bits of plastic of the appropriate size
and shapee and there's one picture of a
mother albatross giving not feeding that
awful man in England who does the BBC
scare stories about walruses committing
suicide uh because of plastic or
something I forget what he said it was
it was because of pack of polar bears
were going to eat them and they decided
they'd rather fall off a cliff than be
eaten alive by polar bear uh but uh but
all over the world seabirds are using
bits of plastic as a substitute for the
other rare things that they have to find
for their chicks and
then what's his name the TV personality
on BBC who does the
nature bonor yes he's a fake and he he
says he he shows a young woman as
assistant of his holding up a big clear
plastic bag saying this plastic bag was
given to the chick and when the chick
died we did an autopsy and we found this
plastic bag in the chick it's a total
lie no mother Albatross or father
Albatross would give a plastic bag to
its chick what they give is little
pieces of uniformly sized Plastics that
go into the gizard and and do when they
when they give a whole squid to a bird a
baby and and
themselves The Squid gets ground up and
the poop gets pooped out but the beak
stays in there as a grinding agent so
that's one of the way one of the ways
they get a hard object in there and uh
it it's fascinating but the Smithsonian
goes along with the story that they're
feeding plastic to their chicks uh and
it and that it's a negative thing it's
been studied for 50 years and no one's
ever found a negative thing about it
it's just a substitute for all the other
little hard objects that they've got in
their in their region and and and as I
say there there's it's rare to find
Pebbles on a Windswept Rocky island and
that's just the way it is and they
should be telling people that it's a
great story that that our little bits of
plastic are be are useful and there is
no Pacific Garbage Patch one only one
picture on the internet that I found
I've looked all over for the Pacific
garbage patch on on the images in the
internet and there's one that shows a
massive area of debris over the ocean
and a diver coming up and underneath it
says part of the Great Pacific Garbage
Patch
I studied that photo for a little while
and realized there's mountains in the
background right in the background
there's no mountains in the middle of
Pacific
Ocean it's the debris from the tsunami
that killed 18,000 people and they're
using it to lie about the plastic
Garbage
Patch because there there was 20 towns
swept into the
ocean and and 18,000 people killed the
the the nuclear plant didn't kill
anybody but
CNN had a headline in the middle of of
that
disaster and but it wasn't a disaster
from a human life point of view two
people did die they were Swept Away by
the tsunami but uh on the headline said
nuclear crisis deepens as bodies wash
ashore that was the headline right right
right right right and I I've looked it
up and it's gone I guess they decided it
wasn't really a very good thing for
people to know about because imagine
that blaming blaming the the 18,000
bodies on the nuclear
disaster so that's the kind of thing
we've got going in this world these days
and I'm doing everything I can to try to
straighten it out and I I think you you
saw my presentation I cover a wide
number of topics and I do not believe
for a minute that these scare stories
are true uh like what is it in the GMO
that you're that this is a multi-billion
dollar anti-gmo campaign where the
Europeans are refusing to buy crops from
Africa if they adopt the improved
product when in fact every single one of
us is genetically modified none of us
are identical to our parents that's what
sexual reproduction is mixes the genes
up and all they're doing is very
methodically taking a gene that they
know exactly what it does in the species
they're taking it from and putting it
into one that doesn't have it and that's
what golden rice is all about I work I I
campaigned for five years on Golden rice
I came back into into the movement in
2013 and my brother and my wife and I
and got a team of people from Germany
and India and and and and and and
Australia and went to all the Greenpeace
office locations and demonstrated in
front of them and got to 30 million
people by the media but it didn't it
just then we couldn't do it because
they've they've got control of the
environmental apparatus the
governments uh in the same way as this
whole uh so-called what do they call
it I forget the name of of what they
what the the movement what's the name of
the movement woke that's right the
movement I I I probably want to forget
the word yeah because it's so
stupid but there just they're they're
they every anything but woke and and
just don't have lost all scientific and
and communicative uh faculties uh they
they they're insane uh it's some kind of
mental disease as for from from my way
of thinking and the the climate thing is
no different than all of these other
social and political things I mean
Equity yeah sure that's a good word but
they're using it like a
sledgehammer and because all people
aren't the same and and and and good
good for that I we don't want all people
to be the
same and and to to say that white people
are all racist if that isn't racist I
don't know what is h how how can anybody
think that way well this is the mystery
that we're trying to unpack with with
podcasts exactly like this yeah yeah
well all right sir we should we should
stop this um for everybody watching and
listening I'm going to continue to talk
to Dr Patrick Moore for another half an
hour on the daily wire side and I think
I'm going to talk to him at least in
part about the consequences of putting
himself outside the more radical um
faction of the environmentalist movement
so that should be a fascinating
discussion and if you want to join us on
the daily wire side and throw some
support their way they make these
podcasts a consequence of their
generosity and uh and have helped me a
lot to expand the professionalism of the
of the production and to distribute the
content to a hypothetically wider
audience Dr Moore thank you very much
for talking to me today and for walking
through all that complex material for
shedding a bit more light on the
relationship between um the lengthy
history of the world the climate
variation that's been part and parcel of
that since day one the composition of
the atmosphere the relationship between
the atmosphere and climate and also the
pathologies of what would you say the
modern politicization of the environment
mental movement much appreciated sir and
uh for everybody watching and listening
thank you for your time and attention
the film crew here in Jacksonville
Florida because that's where I am today
thank you very much for your help Dr
Moore we'll take five and then we'll
reconvene on The Daily wi side thanks Dr
Peterson it's been a
[Music]
pleasure